as humans it's in our nature to want to
improve our health and minimize our
suffering whatever life throws at us
whether it's cancer diabetes heart
disease or even broken bones we want to
try and get better now I'm ahead of a
biomaterials lab and I'm really
fascinated by the way that humans have
used materials and really creative ways
in the body over time take for example
this beautiful blue naked shell this was
actually used by the Mayans as an
artificial tooth replacement we're not
quite sure why they did it it's hard
it's durable but it also had other very
nice properties in fact when they put it
into the jawbone
it could integrate into the jaw and we
know now with very sophisticated imaging
technologies that part of that
integration comes from the fact that
this material is designed in a very
specific way has a beautiful chemistry
has a beautiful architecture and I think
in many ways we can sort of think of
this use of the blue nacre shell and the
Mayans is the first real application of
the blue tooth technology but if we move
on and think throughout history how
people have used different materials in
the body very often it's been physicians
that have been quite creative
they've taken things off the shelf one
of my favorite examples is that of Sir
Harold Ridley who was a famous
ophthalmologist or at least became a
famous ophthalmologist and during World
War two what he would see would be
pilots coming back from their missions
and he noticed that within their eyes
they had shards of small bits of
material lodged within the eye but the
very interesting thing about it was that
material actually wasn't causing any
inflammatory response so he looked into
this and he figured out that actually
that material was little shards of
plastic that were coming from the canopy
of the Spitfires and this led him to
propose that material as a new material
for intraocular lenses
it's called PMMA and it's now used in
millions of people every year and helps
in preventing cataracts and that example
I think is a really nice one because it
helps to remind us that in the early
days people often chose materials
because they were bio inert their very
purpose was to perform a mechanical
function you'd put them in the body and
you wouldn't get an adverse response and
what I want to show you is that in
regenerative medicine we've really
shifted away from that idea of taking a
bio inert material
we're actually actively looking for
materials that will be bioactive that
will interact with the body and that
furthermore we can put in the body
they'll have their function and then
they'll dissolve away over time if we
look at this schematic this is showing
you what we think of as a typical tissue
engineering approach we have cells
they're typically from the patient we
can put those onto a material and we can
make that material very complex if we
want to and we can then grow that up in
the lab or we can put it straight back
into the patient and this is an approach
that's used all over the world including
in our lab but one of the things that's
really important when we're thinking
about stem cells is that obviously stem
cells can be many different things and
they want to be many different things
and so we want to make sure that the
environment we put them into has enough
information so that they can become the
right sort of specialist tissue and if
we think about the different types of
tissues that people are looking at
regenerating all over the world in all
the different labs in the world
there's pretty much every tissue you can
think of and actually the structure of
those tissues is quite different and
it's going to really depend on whether
your patient has any underlying disease
other conditions in terms of how you're
going to regenerate your tissue and
you're going to need to think about the
materials you go to use really carefully
their biochemistry their mechanics and
many other properties as well our
tissues all have very different
abilities to regenerate and here we see
poor prometheus who made a rather tricky
career choice and was punished by the
Greek gods he was tied to a rock and an
eagle would come every day to eat his
liver but of course his liver would
regenerate every day and so
day after day he was punished for
eternity for by by the gods and liver
will regenerate in this very nice way
but actually if we think of other
tissues like cartilage for example even
the simplest NIC and you're going to
find it really difficult to regenerate
your cartilage so it's going to be very
different from tissue to tissue now bone
is somewhere in in in between and this
is one of the tissues that we work on a
lot in our lab and burns actually quite
good at repairing it has to be we've
probably all had fractures at some point
or other and one of the ways that you
can think about repairing your fracture
is this procedure here called an iliac
crest harvest and and what the surgeon
might do is take some bone from your
iliac crest which is just here and then
transplant that somewhere else in the
body and it actually works really well
because it's your own bone and it's well
vascularized which means it's got a
really good blood supply but the problem
is there's only so much you can take and
also when you do that operation your
patients might actually have significant
pain at that defect site even two years
after the operation so what we were
thinking is there's a tremendous need
for bone repair of course but this iliac
crest type approach is is really has a
lot of limitations to it and could we
perhaps recreate the generation of bone
within the body on demand and then be
able to transplant it without these very
very painful after-effects that you
would have with the iliac crest harvest
and so this is what we did and the way
we did it was by coming back to this
typical tissue engineering approach but
actually thinking about it rather
differently and we simplified it a lot
so we got rid of a lot of these steps we
got rid of the need to harvest cells
from the patient we got rid of the need
to put in really fancy chemistries and
we got rid of a need to culture these
scaffolds in the lab and what we really
focused on was our material system and
making it quite simple but because we
used it in a really clever way we were
able to generate enormous amounts of
bone using this approach so we were
using the body as really the catalyst to
help us to make lots of new
boon and it's an approach that we called
the invivo by reactor and we were able
to make enormous amounts of bone using
this approach and I'll talk you through
this so what we do is in humans we all
have a layer of stem cells on the
outside of our long bones that layer is
called the periosteum and that layer is
actually normally very very tightly
bound to the underlying bone and it's
got stem cells in it those stem cells
are really important in the embryo when
it develops and they also sort of wake
up if you have a fracture to help you
with repairing the bone so we take that
periosteum layer and we developed a way
to inject underneath it a liquid that
then within 30 seconds would turn into
quite a rigid gel and can actually lift
the periosteum away from the bone so it
creates in essence an artificial cavity
that is right next to that both the bone
but also this really rich layer of stem
cells and we go in through a pinhole
incision so that no other cells from the
body can get in and what happens is that
that artificial in vivo bioreactor
cavity can then lead to the
proliferation of these stem cells and
they can form lots of new tissue and
then over time you can harvest that
tissue and use it elsewhere in the body
this is a histology slide of what we see
when we do that and essentially what we
see is is very large amounts of bones so
in this picture you can see the middle
of the legs so the bone marrow then you
can see the original bone and you can
see where that original bone finishes
and then just to the left of that is the
new bone that's grown within that
bioreactor cavity and you can actually
make it even larger and that demarcation
that you can see between the original
bone and the new bone acts as a very
slight point of weakness so actually now
the surgeon can come along can harvest
away that new bone and the periosteum
can grow back and so you're left with
the leg in the same sort of state as if
you hadn't operated on it in the first
place so it's very very low in terms of
after pain compared to an iliac crest
harvest and you can grow different
amounts of bone depending on how much
gel you put in there so it really is on
demand sort of procedure
now at the time that we did this this
received a lot of attention in the press
because it was a really nice way of
generating New Bern and we got many many
contacts from different people that were
interested in using this and I'm just
going to tell you sometimes those
contacts are very strange slightly
unexpected and they're very most
interesting let me put it that way
contact that I had was actually from a
team of American footballers that all
wanted to have double-thickness
skulls made on their head and so you you
do get these kind of contacts and of
course being British and also growing up
in France I tend to be very blunt and so
I had to explain to them very nicely
that in their particular case they
probably wasn't that much in there to
protect in him in the first place so
this was our approach and it was simple
materials but we thought about it
carefully and actually know that those
cells in the in the body in the embryos
they developed can form a different kind
of tissue cartilage and so we developed
a gel that was slightly different in
nature and slightly different chemistry
put it in there and we were able to get
hundred-percent cartilage instead and
this approach works really well I think
for pre-planned procedures but it's it's
something you do have to pre-plan so for
other kinds of operations there's
definitely a need for other scaffold
based approaches and when you think
about designing those other scaffolds
actually you need a really
multidisciplinary team and so our team
has chemists it has cell biologists
surgeons
physicists even and those people all
come together and we think really hard
about designing the materials but we
want to make them have enough
information that we can get the cells to
do what we want but not be so complex as
to make it difficult to get to clinic
and so one of the things we think about
a lot is is really trying to understand
the structure of the tissues in the body
and so if we think of bone obviously my
own favorite tissue we zoom in we can
see even if you don't know anything
about bone structure
beautifully organized really beautifully
organized with lots of blood vessels in
there and if we zoom in again we see
that the cells are actually surrounded
by a 3d matrix of nanoscale fibers and
they give a lot of information to the
cells and if we zoom in again actually
in the case of bone the matrix around
the cells is beautifully organized at
the nano scale and it's a hybrid
material that's part organic part
inorganic and that's led to a whole
field really that has looked at
developing materials that have this
hybrid kind of structure and so I'm
showing here just two examples where
we've made some materials that have that
sort of structure and you can really
tailor it you can see here a very
squidgy one and now a material that's
also this hybrid sort of material but
actually has remarkable toughness and
it's no longer brittle and an inorganic
material would normally be really
brittle and you wouldn't be able to have
that sort of strength and toughness in
it one other thing I want to quickly
mention is that many of the scaffolds we
make a porous and they have to be
because you want blood vessels to grow
in there but the pores are actually
oftentimes much bigger than the cells
and so even though it's 3d the cell
might see it more as a slightly curved
surface and that's a little bit
unnatural and so one of the things you
can think about doing is actually making
scaffold with slightly different
dimensions that might be able to
surround yourselves in 3d and give them
a little bit more information and
there's a lot of work going on in both
of these areas now finally I just want
to talk a little bit about applying this
sort of thing to cardiovascular disease
because this is a really big clinical
problem and one of the things that we
know is that unfortunately if you have a
heart attack then that tissue can start
to die and your outcome may not be very
good over time and it would be really
great actually if we could stop that
dead tissue either from dying or help it
to regenerate and there's lots and lots
of stem cell trials going on worldwide
and they use many different types of
cells but one common theme that seems to
be coming out is that actually very
often those cells will die once you've
implanted them and you can either put
them into the heart or into the blood
system
either way we don't seem to be able to
get quite the right number of cells
getting to the location we want them to
and being able to deliver the sort of
beautiful cell regeneration that we
would like to have to get glued good
clinical outcomes and so some of the
things that we're thinking of and many
other people in the field of thinking of
are actually developing materials for
that but there's a difference here
we still need chemistry we still need
mechanics we still need really
interesting typography and we still need
really interesting ways to surround the
cells but now the cells also would
probably quite like a material that's
going to be able to be conductive
because the cells themselves will
respond very well and will actually
conduct signals between themselves you
can see them now beating synchronously
on these materials and that's a very
very exciting development that's going
on so just to wrap up I'd like to
actually say that being able to work in
this this sort of field all of us that
work in this field that's not only super
exciting science but also has a
potential to impact on patients however
big or small they are is really a great
privilege and so for that I'd like to
thank all of you as well thank you
[Applause]
[Music]